Problem: In big cities such as New York City, a huge number of taxi rides is taken per day. As the popularity of app-based vehicle hiring services grows, accurate prediction of taxi fare is essential for enhancing customers’ satisfaction, since it is given as upfront data to the customers. There are many factors that should be considered such as the pickup time, pickup or dropoff locations, etc. in predicting taxi fare. Providing accurate taxi fare at a specific time enables both drivers and customers to decide whether to select the rides or not. The goal of this project is developing a Machine Learning (ML) based model to predict the fare amount for a taxi ride in New York City while some data such as the pickup and dropoff locations are given.
Predicting accurate taxi fares yields better results for taxi cab and ridesharing companies such as Uber, Lyft, etc. Also, this project can be used in traffic congestion prediction and autonomous vehicle research to develop accurate traffic models and choose the fastest and less congested routes.

Data: The data from a Kaggle competition is used for this project (https://www.kaggle.com/c/new-york-city-taxi-fare-prediction/overview).

Storytelling: As the first step, NaN values and outliers have been found and removed from features. Then, new features are extracted by going through the target and the input set of features. In the second step, hypothesis testing (null hypothesis) is checked to see if there is any relationship between two features datasets.

Methodology: Since the target variable (taxi fare amount) is in the form of real variable, different regression models have been employed in this project. The algorithms that have been used in this project are Linear Regression, Random Forest Regression, Decision Tree Regression, Gradient Boosting Regressor, and Linear Support Vector Regression, which are all supervised learning algorithms.

Evaluation: In order to validate the performance of employed machine learning algorithms, some statistical measurements metrics such as R-squared, MSE, RMSE, and correlation coefficient have been considered. Based on the evaluation results, Random Forest model increases the performance. The achieved results are 86 for R-squared, 13 for MSE, 3 for RMSE, and 93 for correlation coefficient.